Hello.
NOTE CONF
So I don't know if you could hear that.
I'm trying different things to get the music to be
NOTE CONF
louder.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Did you hear that at all back there?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Given the volume of talking, I wasn't sure.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
So that was, um, Gerry O'Connor on tenor banjo with
NOTE CONF
some Irish music.
Today, uh, I'm going to be talking about lists and
NOTE CONF
comprehensions.
And I've got.
NOTE CONF
I hope I can get my technology to work, uh,
so that I can show you.
NOTE CONF
Haskell running.
Sometimes this gives me difficulty.
NOTE CONF
So listing comprehensions.
Um, so, uh, lists, uh, I've mentioned lists.
NOTE CONF
I think it's the most important data structure in functional
programming.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, think if you're if you're used to Java
or, um, or some other conventional language C plus plus.
NOTE CONF
It's like arrays but different.
It's so-called compound data structure, meaning that it's for collecting
NOTE CONF
simpler items of data together.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to start by talking about lists.
And then I'm going to get on to list comprehensions
NOTE CONF
okay.
So it's for collecting together a bunch of data items
NOTE CONF
of the same kind.
Um and here are some examples.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, a list of integers.
NOTE CONF
Um, all right.
So here's a list which has three integers in it
NOTE CONF
one, two and three.
It could be one, seven, 92.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't have to be an order okay.
But they're all integers.
NOTE CONF
They're all the same type.
Uh, the type is called int.
NOTE CONF
These values or values of type int in for integers.
Um, the uh you create a list by taking a
NOTE CONF
bunch of values, putting commas between them and square brackets
around them like that.
NOTE CONF
And you can give them a name if you want.
So nums is what I've decided to call this one
NOTE CONF
nums equals, uh, this, uh, this list value.
And, um, when I, when I, uh, define things, it's
NOTE CONF
nice to give them, uh, types type signature.
Um, good practice.
NOTE CONF
So here's the type of nums and it says it's
a, it's a list of integers okay.
NOTE CONF
The type of the list.
The list type is written also with square brackets okay.
NOTE CONF
Square brackets.
And in the middle the type that it's a list
NOTE CONF
of.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so first example list of numbers or a list
of integers called nums.
NOTE CONF
Um the order is significant.
So one two, three.
NOTE CONF
The list containing one, two, three is different from the
list containing three, 321.
NOTE CONF
It's different from the list containing one, one, two, three.
Okay, so unlike unlike sets in mathematics, okay, sets in
NOTE CONF
mathematics, all that matters is the values that are in
the set.
NOTE CONF
In lists, the order that they appear is also significant.
So that's our first example.
NOTE CONF
Second example list of characters.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So in Haskell you have a type called char which
is short for character.
NOTE CONF
And you write the values of that type using single
quotation marks.
NOTE CONF
So for example capital I small n small f this
is a the digit one.
NOTE CONF
And this is the capital letter A.
So that's a list of characters five characters okay.
NOTE CONF
And the type is list of char.
Okay, list of characters occur a lot.
NOTE CONF
And so we have a special notation for them in
Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um, and a special name for the type.
So the name of the type list of char is
NOTE CONF
a synonym for that is the type string okay.
String is a list of characters.
NOTE CONF
And instead of having to write these square brackets and
all these quotation marks I can write, I can just
NOTE CONF
write this string like that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Double quotation marks.
And then the, the the letters one at a time,
NOTE CONF
the characters one at a time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's these two are identical in meaning.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, only difference is that that's got a different name
than that does.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But writing a string like this or writing it like
NOTE CONF
that, uh, whoops.
Same same list of characters Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's easy.
By the way, this here.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is a comment.
Uh, Haskell comments are introduced with double double dashes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So those are two kinds of lists.
NOTE CONF
Those are two examples of lists.
Lists of different kinds of things.
NOTE CONF
Important is that, um, in the list of integers, you've
only got integers.
NOTE CONF
And the list of characters, you've only got characters.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You can have all kinds of things in lists.
Um, for example, you can have lists in lists.
NOTE CONF
So here's a list of lists of integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So all of the um, all of the items in
this list are lists of integers.
NOTE CONF
Uh, they happen to have different lengths.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here's a list of a list of integers containing
the single integer one.
NOTE CONF
Here's a list of three integers two, two, four, two.
Here's an empty list of integers, and here's a list
NOTE CONF
of length two containing three and five.
Okay, so these are four lists of integers.
NOTE CONF
And each of those four lists we put them together
with with commas and then square brackets on the outside.
NOTE CONF
That's a list of lists of integers okay.
And that's what the type says.
NOTE CONF
List of list of integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, uh, this example shows you can have lists
containing one thing.
NOTE CONF
List containing one thing is different from the thing that's
in that list okay.
NOTE CONF
The list containing one is different from the number one.
They have different types.
NOTE CONF
You can have empty lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You can have listed or as long as you want.
Even.
NOTE CONF
Even infinitely long, which is an unusual thing.
It's a special thing in Haskell that you can have
NOTE CONF
infinite lists.
And I'll show you how to write programs using infinite
NOTE CONF
lists in a few lectures.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
All the ones we're going to see in this lecture
are finite lists okay.
NOTE CONF
Small finite lists.
So list of list of list of list of integers
NOTE CONF
here.
Okay with me so far I hope.
NOTE CONF
Um, the next example is a list of functions.
So a list of functions of type picture arrow picture.
NOTE CONF
So these are a list of two functions.
They're from your tutorial exercise.
NOTE CONF
And they both have the type uh picture arrow picture
okay.
NOTE CONF
Invert and flip v okay.
So you can have lists of functions.
NOTE CONF
Functions can be used as data just the same as
anything else can be used as data.
NOTE CONF
You know, integers strings, whatever.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
They're the same type of function both of these and.
And so it's a list of functions of that type.
NOTE CONF
Um so here's an here's an error.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is what happens if you try to, um, try
to create a list that has different kinds of, um,
NOTE CONF
of, uh, different types of values in it.
So this is a, an integer, a string, and a
NOTE CONF
list of integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I said all lists have to have the same,
um, they have to have homogeneous types of values so
NOTE CONF
that all the values and the list have to be
the same type.
NOTE CONF
This is obviously not satisfying that okay.
So integer string list of integers.
NOTE CONF
This will be a type error.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, in doing your tutorial exercise, I hope you've all
started by now.
NOTE CONF
If not, your, uh your your your late, uh, deadline
tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Have any of you encountered a type error?
NOTE CONF
Okay, many.
Not all.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, I'll talk about type errors in a minute.
NOTE CONF
Um, you'll you'll see that it's a type error because
it says type error.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then it'll tell you some stuff about your about
NOTE CONF
your mistake.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
There are some here's, here's a final example on this
on this page here.
NOTE CONF
This is um, the example of some notations that we
have in Haskell for some, some useful second special cases.
NOTE CONF
So, um, here's a list containing the numbers from one
up to ten.
NOTE CONF
So 123456789 ten.
We write 1.. ten.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We could have written 1.. 1000.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, by the way, all these numbers, all these
integers on this on this page are positive integers.
NOTE CONF
There are of course negative ones as well.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so this is a this is a notation for
um you can use it for um, you know, lists
NOTE CONF
containing sequences of numbers.
You can also use it for um, uh, sequences of
NOTE CONF
um, this containing sequences of letters.
For example, you could put, you could put character a
NOTE CONF
dot dot character Z to get the, the, the alphabet
as a list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And there's some and there's slightly more complicated notations if
NOTE CONF
you want to do things like have the even numbers,
you can write two, you can write zero comma 2..
NOTE CONF
100 to get all the even numbers from 0 to
100.
NOTE CONF
Haskell sees that you've got zero comma two and uh,
and decides that you mean you want, you don't want
NOTE CONF
okay, you don't want zero, one, two, etc. you want
zero, two, and then four, six, eight and so forth.
NOTE CONF
So there's these notations.
I'm not going to talk about them anymore in the
NOTE CONF
lecture.
They're in the book.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, sometimes they're useful.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Got that.
Those are lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What do we do with lists?
NOTE CONF
Well, one of the things we can do is put
them together and take them apart.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so, uh, there is a function for putting, um,
NOTE CONF
values or an extra item onto the front of a
list.
NOTE CONF
So if we've got a list containing, uh, two and
three, we can put another element on the front one
NOTE CONF
and we get this list.
One, two, three.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And there's an operation or a function for doing that.
NOTE CONF
It's written as a colon here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is pronounced cons.
Um cons short for construct.
NOTE CONF
This is a kind of historical uh, name um, for,
for this function, Dysfunction.
NOTE CONF
It's, um, originates with, uh, functional programming language Lisp from
1960.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, nevermind.
NOTE CONF
That's what that's what it's called.
You just have to remember that or I mean, I'm
NOTE CONF
going to be using the word I'm going to be
using the words cons.
NOTE CONF
When you see a colon, I'm going to be saying
cons okay.
NOTE CONF
So cons what is cons.
It is a function.
NOTE CONF
And it goes uh.
Let's see the type of cons is.
NOTE CONF
A arrow list of a arrow.
List of a.
NOTE CONF
Can you see that in the back?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, these, these variables can stand for any type.
So for example in our list of int our list
NOTE CONF
of int.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's the type we're using here.
We take an integer and we take a list of
NOTE CONF
integers.
And we apply this uh this cons this cons function.
NOTE CONF
It's an infix meaning it goes in between the two
arguments because it's a symbol okay.
NOTE CONF
Like plus or something like that.
And we get this list of integers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, if we try using it the other way around,
NOTE CONF
it can only be used to put, uh, values onto
the front of lists.
NOTE CONF
If we try to put a value on the on
the back of a list at the, at the at
NOTE CONF
the other end of the list, we get a type
error.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And um, here's an example of a Haskell type error.
NOTE CONF
Um, and unfortunately, uh, Haskell type errors are often, uh,
confusing and, uh, difficult to read.
NOTE CONF
So what's happening here?
So first of all, what what have I done wrong?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It says there that the type of this operation of
NOTE CONF
this function cons is it takes a value of a
type and another value lists of that type and produce
NOTE CONF
values of lists of that type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we haven't done that here.
We've got a list as the first as the first
NOTE CONF
argument.
And we've got a a value which isn't a list
NOTE CONF
as a second argument.
It's the wrong it's the wrong way around.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't fit the type of that of that function.
And so what I get from Haskell is a type
NOTE CONF
error.
And as I said, the what it actually gives you
NOTE CONF
as a type error is often difficult to read.
And especially when you're starting off okay at this stage,
NOTE CONF
you know, second lecture about functional programming, um, you you
can't understand this.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I can I can barely understand this.
It's, um, Haskell has a complex, powerful type system, and
NOTE CONF
when you make a type error, it it tries to
figure out what you might have meant and gives you
NOTE CONF
some helpful information about that.
And in this case, it's guessed wrong and giving you
NOTE CONF
some, some useless information about something that's that you don't
understand.
NOTE CONF
And it's okay.
It thinks that there's something going on with numerical types
NOTE CONF
and lists of lists and things like that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So at this stage you see a type error.
The thing to, to think, to, to sort of understand
NOTE CONF
from it is I've made a mistake with the types.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, it's probably a waste of time to try
to figure out what this means.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In this case, it's guessed wrong.
NOTE CONF
The thing that might be useful here, um, when you're
when you're, um, you know, using a file with, with
NOTE CONF
the program in it which has multiple lines, um, this,
uh, this thing right here.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if you see what I'm pointing at.
It says one, one colon, one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That means that the error is in line one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, column one of my of my, uh, of my
input.
NOTE CONF
In this case, it's interactive input.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But if it was a file, it would sort of
say which line of the file it is, would have
NOTE CONF
the file name, and it would say, you know, line
17, uh, you know, column six or something like that.
NOTE CONF
This is sometimes useful or it's often useful for localising
what it is, uh, where it is that, well, which,
NOTE CONF
which expression it is that Haskell is complaining about.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In this case, it's obvious because it's just one line,
and the problem starts at the first and the first
NOTE CONF
character.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, um, you'll be seeing type errors sometimes, uh, it'll
be easier to understand than what's happening right here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and as time goes by, you'll you'll begin to
understand some of what it's trying to tell you, okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's putting together lists.
We can take apart lists.
NOTE CONF
Um, using functions like head and tail.
These are actually built in.
NOTE CONF
But, um, so what head does is if you give
it a list, um, it gives you the first item
NOTE CONF
in the list.
So it's type has, it's the type.
NOTE CONF
Um, the type of head is a list of a
arrow a.
NOTE CONF
So you give it a list of values of some
type, and it gives you a value of that type.
NOTE CONF
And the one it gives you is the first one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if you wanted to define it the definition would
be like this here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Let me well, let me first say, uh, this is
a, uh, this definition features something called pattern matching, which
NOTE CONF
I think we're seeing here for the first time.
So pattern matching is a powerful, uh, device used in,
NOTE CONF
um, writing Haskell functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what this says is if you take the function
head and you apply it to a list formed by
NOTE CONF
taking x cons xs.
Um, then the value should be x.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is given an actual value like like like
NOTE CONF
the list containing one two, three.
It will match, uh, this pattern against that actual value.
NOTE CONF
And it will say well the first element.
So this could be formed by taking one whoops one
NOTE CONF
cons list containing two three.
So x matches one x is matches list containing two
NOTE CONF
three.
The result is x.
NOTE CONF
And that's one okay.
You're going to be seeing pattern matching function definitions a
NOTE CONF
lot.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's the head.
The tail is everything except the head.
NOTE CONF
And if I wrote a definition of it, it would
be um, tail of x.
NOTE CONF
Cons xz equals xz.
So it's everything after the head.
NOTE CONF
These are built in functions.
Um, so I'm introducing things as I go, uh, through
NOTE CONF
examples.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here's the first example of pattern matching this type
and the type of cons up.
NOTE CONF
There are examples of what's known as polymorphic function types.
Polymorphic means that the types have variables in them.
NOTE CONF
Okay I mentioned this terminology because you're going to be
seeing it in the book and I'll mention it in
NOTE CONF
lectures sometimes, okay.
Sometimes without thinking of, uh, whether you've seen it or
NOTE CONF
not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's a little bit of a hassle convention.
It's not.
NOTE CONF
It's not required, but it's common.
Okay, so I've got um a value x I'm using
NOTE CONF
the variable x here okay.
So it's an item of this list okay.
NOTE CONF
And the thing after the cons is a list containing
the same type of items okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've got x.
And then we got a bunch of uh, a list
NOTE CONF
containing things of the same type as x.
And often we use the same variable with an S
NOTE CONF
after it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is an item x.
And this is a list of things like x okay.
NOTE CONF
So and it's pronounced x's.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Just it's just sometimes convenient.
It means you can get a little bit of information
NOTE CONF
about the type from the variable names.
As I said you can use any variable names you
NOTE CONF
want.
So this is just something you'll see commonly, but it's
NOTE CONF
not required.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So far so good.
This is about this is about lists.
NOTE CONF
Building lists, taking them apart.
Um, now what do I mean by list comprehensions?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is one way to compute with lists.
And in the last lecture you remember that I talked
NOTE CONF
about, um, programming style.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So doing a computation on a whole data structure at
once.
NOTE CONF
So this is, this is what I'm going to be
doing now, um, with list comprehension.
NOTE CONF
So this is doing computation with a whole list at
once.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And starting off, um.
Starting off easy here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The notation.
NOTE CONF
Well, I'll come to this in a second.
I'll just say list comprehensions.
NOTE CONF
Uh, in the book you will read in chapter one
about set comprehensions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is supposed to be, uh, the same Idea.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Sets are from mathematics.
NOTE CONF
Lists are from programming in Haskell.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, the same, same type of notation.
So again I'm going to proceed by showing you some
NOTE CONF
examples.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here is our first example of a list comprehension
okay.
NOTE CONF
What it does is it's taking um it's taking a
list.
NOTE CONF
Uh 123 okay.
Let's containing three values.
NOTE CONF
And what it says is that for every value x
from that list, I want you to give me, um,
NOTE CONF
x times x.
And I want a list of those values.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, it's the list of x times x such
NOTE CONF
that x is drawn from the list one, two, three
is the way you would read that if you were
NOTE CONF
to want to want to read it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
So, uh, what is the result?
NOTE CONF
It's one for nine.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
One is is the value of x times x if
x is equal to one for is the value of
NOTE CONF
x times x if x is equal to two and
likewise nine is the value of x times x if
NOTE CONF
x is equal to three.
So it's taking each of those values one at a
NOTE CONF
time and giving you the list of all the, um,
the squares.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Here's another example.
NOTE CONF
Here's a string.
Remember, a string is a list of characters.
NOTE CONF
So here's a list of 13 characters.
And what I want is the list containing the result
NOTE CONF
for each one of those characters.
See, I want the result of this computation to lower
NOTE CONF
of C.
I want a list of those values to lower is
NOTE CONF
a built in function in Haskell.
It's in one of the libraries, um, uh, and it
NOTE CONF
converts characters to lowercase, okay.
And if it's already in lowercase, it leaves it alone.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So hello world with h and w and capital letters.
NOTE CONF
Um, turns into Hello world with h and w in
lowercase.
NOTE CONF
Okay, remember, this string is exactly the same as a
list of characters.
NOTE CONF
Okay, H followed by E, followed by L, followed by
L, and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
As I as I wrote, uh, up here, this example,
NOTE CONF
remember that okay.
Next example.
NOTE CONF
The next example introduces something called pairs.
Over on the right hand side.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'll talk it through and then explain.
Okay, so for X drawn from the list 1 to
NOTE CONF
3 I want to pair containing x.
And whether or not x is even.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Even is a built in function.
NOTE CONF
It takes an integer and it tells you whether it's
even or not.
NOTE CONF
So apply to zero.
It will say true apply to one.
NOTE CONF
It will say false, apply to two, it will say
true, and so forth okay.
NOTE CONF
So we get the values.
So so this is a yeah I want a list
NOTE CONF
of all those pairs okay.
So um here's the result for uh for the first
NOTE CONF
value one.
If x is one then the result of this expression
NOTE CONF
is one comma false.
So one this is the value x comma.
NOTE CONF
Uh The, uh, whether or not one is is even
okay.
NOTE CONF
It isn't.
So we have false.
NOTE CONF
And then two true because true is because two is
even.
NOTE CONF
And then three comma false because three is not even.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So three values in this list we get three values
in the result list.
NOTE CONF
And each of them is a pair okay.
What is a pair.
NOTE CONF
Well there are three pairs.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So there's there's one of those pairs.
NOTE CONF
The type of that is Int comma bool in round.
In round brackets okay.
NOTE CONF
In parentheses okay.
So pairs.
NOTE CONF
You can also have triples and quadruples and quintuple and
so forth okay.
NOTE CONF
So uh one uh comma uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This would be a, a triple.
So it's a three.
NOTE CONF
It's a three tuple.
This is a this is called a pair.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is called a triple uh or a this
is a two tuple.
NOTE CONF
This is a three tuple and so forth okay.
So this would be of type bum int comma string
NOTE CONF
comma bool okay.
So value a value of type pair is written.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of like a list except with round brackets
or parentheses around it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Commas in between the values.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the type.
Again is written similarly to the value.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But here we've got type names.
NOTE CONF
Round brackets around common in between.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um so those are, those are tuples.
Uh, first first being a pair, the second being a
NOTE CONF
triple.
Um, like in this thing.
NOTE CONF
OOP.
Like in here.
NOTE CONF
Um, difference between lists and and tuples okay.
Lists.
NOTE CONF
You can only have uh, values of the same type
in a list.
NOTE CONF
And you can expand a list.
You can make it.
NOTE CONF
You can you can grow it by putting things on
the front with cons um tuples.
NOTE CONF
These are fixed length.
And um I mean, of course you can take them
NOTE CONF
apart, you can take the values out, you can make
something bigger out of those values.
NOTE CONF
But there's no operation which takes a tuple and kind
of puts things on the front of it, no matter
NOTE CONF
how long it is, and then makes it one longer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So there are particular length and the the type of
the things in the list can be different.
NOTE CONF
They don't have to be different, but they can be
different as shown here okay.
NOTE CONF
So different ways of putting values together.
All right with me so far okay.
NOTE CONF
Last example here is um uh so we take extra
n from the list containing 4 or 5 and six
NOTE CONF
and then the, the results, the values that are in
this list that I get out of this are the
NOTE CONF
result of this so-called conditional expression.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If then else you might have seen in other programming
languages if you've used other programming languages, um, if condition,
NOTE CONF
then result.
Else.
NOTE CONF
Other result.
Okay, if the condition is true.
NOTE CONF
If x is even, then the result here will be
x.
NOTE CONF
If x is not even, then the result will be
x plus one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if we take x equals four the result so
NOTE CONF
four is even.
So the value is for.
NOTE CONF
If we take the x equals five x is not
even.
NOTE CONF
So the result is x plus one which is six.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If x is six it's even.
So the result is x which is six okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is why we get the result four comma
six comma six.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So those are some simple examples of set of list
NOTE CONF
comprehensions.
Notice that the I mean we've always got a variable
NOTE CONF
here.
And the variable name doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
I've used x three times and I've used C once.
Doesn't matter, okay?
NOTE CONF
But whatever the variable is, it will normally occur in
the expression at the beginning here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You take values from a list and then you do
NOTE CONF
something with those values.
You square them, you convert them to lowercase, etc..
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, this this part of the list comprehension is
NOTE CONF
called a generator.
And this symbol is pronounced drawn from.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So I said this is like in, in mathematics set
NOTE CONF
comprehensions.
So for example, um.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is list notation curly brackets for
lists.
NOTE CONF
So this is not Haskell.
This is mathematics okay.
NOTE CONF
Curly brackets for lists.
Membership.
NOTE CONF
Uh operation okay.
It says for all uh, for all people P who
NOTE CONF
are students?
I want the ones that have red hair.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, actually, this was a bad example to show you
NOTE CONF
right now, because I haven't I haven't written I haven't
yet shown you an example that that would compare with
NOTE CONF
this.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But it's a this is a this is a set
NOTE CONF
notation for producing a subset of the set of all
students containing the ones that have red hair.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And what's kind of similar with this notation.
NOTE CONF
And that notation okay.
We've got square brackets instead of a set of curly
NOTE CONF
brackets.
We've got a vertical bar in the middle.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The the order of the things is, is a little
NOTE CONF
bit the other way around.
We've got we've this this is thing is kind of
NOTE CONF
like a generator.
And then we do something with the, with the, the
NOTE CONF
values okay.
Over here.
NOTE CONF
So it's, it's kind of the opposite order okay.
Um, in case you forget in list notation, in the
NOTE CONF
list comprehension notation whether you should write, I mean, it's
easy to forget things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, my examples all look kind of like this
NOTE CONF
up there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's sometimes easy to forget, you know, there's some arrow
in here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So do I mean, this arrow or that arrow?
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Well, Haskell will tell you which ones, right?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But a useful little, uh, mnemonic device Is to notice
NOTE CONF
that membership here.
This epsilon symbol looks a little bit like that arrow.
NOTE CONF
Okay, it's not exactly the same, but, uh, similar sort
of shape.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I'll push on a little bit, and then I'll
NOTE CONF
give you.
I mean, nobody's kind of raised their hand yet.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but let me do a little bit more, and
then maybe you'll have some questions.
NOTE CONF
Um, what time is it?
Oh, no.
NOTE CONF
I'm way behind schedule.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Here are examples that are a little bit more complicated.
They involve what's known as guards.
NOTE CONF
These things at the end here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I want, uh, the list, uh, containing the values
from, from this list.
NOTE CONF
So x from 1 to 3.
But I only want the odd ones.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Or here I take an okay.
NOTE CONF
So here are the odd ones one and three okay.
Here the X from the from the list 1 to
NOTE CONF
3.
I only want the odd ones and I want to
NOTE CONF
square the result okay one and nine.
Here's another list I want x from this list.
NOTE CONF
I only want the ones that are greater than zero
okay.
NOTE CONF
Which happened to be 42 and 24 okay.
There's the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, here's a list containing a list of characters.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I only want the I only want the ones that
NOTE CONF
are alphabetic.
This is a built in function.
NOTE CONF
Alphabetic means.
It's like a letter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So a comma is not a letter.
NOTE CONF
A space is not a letter.
Exclamation mark is not a letter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I want to convert them to lowercase.
NOTE CONF
So I want all the alphabetic Characters and I want
them converted to lowercase.
NOTE CONF
And so this is the result of that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
These things are called guards.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This thing after the comma.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
These are expressions that give a Boolean result truth values.
Else true or false okay.
NOTE CONF
Or it applied to an integer.
It gives you true or false.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you know x greater than zero.
True or false is alpha of C is true or
NOTE CONF
false.
Now, um.
NOTE CONF
So the components this this this this is a kind
of simple example of, of, uh, of list comprehension, but
NOTE CONF
it has all the components in it.
We've got a, uh, this thing here is called a
NOTE CONF
generator.
I said already this thing here is called a guard.
NOTE CONF
And then we've got a kind of result expression.
So this is this is what we will normally have
NOTE CONF
in a list comprehension is a generator a guard and
a result expression okay.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes the result expression is very simple like here.
Sometimes there's no guard like in these examples.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so that's the way it works okay.
NOTE CONF
Of course.
Um, the guard will usually, uh, mention the element, the
NOTE CONF
generator, uh, you know, the variable and the generator.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Ord x here.
X is the thing in the generator.
NOTE CONF
By the way, I'm, uh, taking trouble to tell you
how to pronounce things.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is the list of x times x such
that x is drawn from the list containing one, two,
NOTE CONF
three such that x is odd.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I think it's helpful if you can pronounce things when
you're reading them.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise, it's hard to think about the think about the
things that you're talking about.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, if you're reading, if you're reading a book or
NOTE CONF
something and you've got a bit of notation and you
don't know how to pronounce it, then you have no
NOTE CONF
way when you're reading to kind of read to yourself,
you know, sort of blah, blah, blah, blah.
NOTE CONF
And then you come to a formula or something and
you just say, um, formula, okay?
NOTE CONF
If you can't pronounce it, you don't know, you can't
think about it very well.
NOTE CONF
Is a question there?
What's that?
NOTE CONF
Like if you use multiple guides.
Could you use multiple cards?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
That's a good question.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You can use multiple guards.
NOTE CONF
So this example these examples all use only one guard.
You can have multiple guards.
NOTE CONF
In fact you can also have multiple generators.
But I'm going to come to that later okay?
NOTE CONF
You can have multiple guards and generators.
Good question.
NOTE CONF
Um, another question up there to.
Catch.
NOTE CONF
Speak into the black thing.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, do you have to define the types if you
do list comprehensions?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do you have to define types?
NOTE CONF
Uh, no, you don't have to define the types.
Um, Haskell figures it out for you.
NOTE CONF
It's a good idea to define the type.
It's kind of useful, uh, documentation about what you're doing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Anybody else with pressing questions?
NOTE CONF
I'm kind of.
I'm going to have trouble with time here, so I
NOTE CONF
want to kind of press on, um, because I need
more examples.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Some in product.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
These are built in.
NOTE CONF
These are built in functions.
Um, and here's just the reason I'm talking about this
NOTE CONF
now is because you put them together.
You can put them together with comprehensions like like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Sum is adding together all the values in a list
NOTE CONF
of integers.
Um, product is multiplying all the values together in a
NOTE CONF
list of integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so, for example, the sum of the odd numbers
in the list one, two, three is is ten.
NOTE CONF
Because you take, uh, you know, one is odd, two
is not odd, three is odd.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, the result of the squares of the result
of this um, list comprehension is, is, uh, one comma
NOTE CONF
nine and the sum of that is ten.
The product of these numbers is 24.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Now interesting special cases, the sum of the list of
odd of the list of the empty list of numbers
NOTE CONF
is zero.
That's that's what you would expect, right?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, and the product of the list of empty numbers
NOTE CONF
is is is zero.
Two.
NOTE CONF
Right.
No it isn't, it's one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why is it one?
NOTE CONF
Does anybody know why it's one?
Because it works better that way.
NOTE CONF
It works better that way.
But there's another reason.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
What's that?
Yeah, that's another reason.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Zero factorial is one.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Identity?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
That's what I wanted to hear.
NOTE CONF
Uh, one one is the multiplicative identity.
One is the is the identity value for the function
NOTE CONF
multiplication okay.
Zero is the identity value for the function addition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's why.
NOTE CONF
And that's the reason why it works better.
And that's the reason why factorial of zero is one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So when you meet a function, come up to a
function in the street.
NOTE CONF
And the first question you should ask is what is
your type?
NOTE CONF
And, um, and if it's a, if it's a binary
function like of type A arrow a our a whatever
NOTE CONF
that is.
Then the second question should be are you associative and
NOTE CONF
then are you commutative.
And then what is your identity element okay.
NOTE CONF
It's useful to know these things about functions.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
As you will see.
So here are actually some um some functions defined using
NOTE CONF
comprehensions okay.
We can use these these comprehension expressions in function definitions.
NOTE CONF
So for example the the function which, which takes a
list of integers and gives you a list of integers
NOTE CONF
and it gives you the squares of all the integers
in the in the argument.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we've already seen that we can do that using
NOTE CONF
this list comprehension.
And so this will of course work for any list.
NOTE CONF
X is not just the list containing one, two and
three.
NOTE CONF
Okay, and here's another example.
We want a function to take the odd numbers of
NOTE CONF
a list of integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we know how to do that because it was
an example we've already seen.
NOTE CONF
And so here's a list a function that will do
that for any list.
NOTE CONF
Not just the list.
Whatever it was that my example was okay, odds of
NOTE CONF
X is equals.
You know this this list comprehension.
NOTE CONF
And finally, the most exciting example here is the sum
of the squares of the odd numbers in a in
NOTE CONF
a list of integers okay.
And we can compute that like this okay.
NOTE CONF
We take the the sum applied to the list of
x times x such that x is drawn from x
NOTE CONF
is and x is odd.
Okay, the sum of the squares of the odd numbers
NOTE CONF
in the list.
Now will I get?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
You got that?
NOTE CONF
Now quick check.
You've seen this already in your tutorial exercise.
NOTE CONF
If you've if you've done it already, which you should
have or or should be doing it.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, I want to show you, um, this running if
it will work.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Whoops.
NOTE CONF
Here's here's this.
The same code is is on the on the screen.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Up there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Except I I'm going to be able to run it
NOTE CONF
in, um, in Haskell on my laptop here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, I've added another, um, function at the bottom here.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, these are the functions I had a minute
ago.
NOTE CONF
Uh, some, uh, squares odds.
Some squares odds.
NOTE CONF
And, um.
And so what's quick check.
NOTE CONF
Quick check you've seen is a is a thing in
Haskell which allows you to do random, um, testing on
NOTE CONF
random value, so generates 100 random values.
And then you can, um, and it'll tell you what
NOTE CONF
the results of the tests are.
So for example, I might want to know if, um,
NOTE CONF
if the, uh, the some let me do this over
here.
NOTE CONF
If the, um, if the, if I take the odds
from XS and then I take the squares of those
NOTE CONF
values and then take the sum of that, if that's
the same as what I would do by applying this
NOTE CONF
function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so let's see whether what, what um so quick.
Quick check.
NOTE CONF
Notice the capitalisation.
Small q big big C and I need to apply
NOTE CONF
it to the uh, to that function.
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
Wait.
I first have to load in the.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Needed to load the code first.
NOTE CONF
Um.
What is it called?
NOTE CONF
Why did this not.
Why is this not.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It worked.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so so it, uh, it says.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
That's right.
It passed 100 tests.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Passing 100 test doesn't mean it's it's, uh, it's guaranteed
NOTE CONF
to to be true for all the other values.
Okay, maybe only those hundred values and not any other.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But, um, it gives you a little bit of confidence.
NOTE CONF
Okay, uh, let's look at the other function that I,
that I, um, that I had down here.
NOTE CONF
So here's another property.
So that was a property that takes a list of
NOTE CONF
integers and produces a boolean value.
And it's, it's checking whether this equation holds for each
NOTE CONF
of the values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, here's another one.
Um, this is checking whether the, the, the sum of
NOTE CONF
the squares of the odd, um, uh, numbers in a
list of integers is always positive.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, is this true?
NOTE CONF
We can ask QuickCheck.
Uh, it's called positive.
NOTE CONF
No, it's not, uh, it's not true of the empty
list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and in fact, it would also not be true
NOTE CONF
of, uh, a list containing, um, a single, uh, well,
a list containing only even numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, this is useful.
Um, and in your exercises, you're going to be using
NOTE CONF
it.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
And that is, uh, the almost the end of my
lecture.
NOTE CONF
I just want to say that, um, uh, tomorrow you've
got Julian.
NOTE CONF
So the lectures this week are a little bit different,
uh, in order.
NOTE CONF
So I'm, I'm teaching on Monday and Friday.
Julian's teaching on Tuesday and Thursday.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I am not able to take questions after this
lecture because I'm running to the airport to go to
NOTE CONF
Brussels.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So but the answers to your questions here are the
answers to your questions.
NOTE CONF
If you're having trouble with the tutorial, okay.
If you have any trouble with the tutorial, uh, go
NOTE CONF
to the to the labs.
Merchiston house from 3 to 5, Appleton Tower from 4
NOTE CONF
to 6 Six.
If you're having trouble with Haskell on your laptop, use
NOTE CONF
dice.
It's on the machines in Appleton Tower.
NOTE CONF
It works.
Okay, those are the answers to most of your questions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, yeah, good luck with the tutorial.
NOTE CONF